[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Science has provided
humanity with an incredible
understanding of
our physical world.
However, when it comes to
the issue of the human mind,
progress has been slow
and littered with issues.
Materialist science
is attempting
to prove that
consciousness is merely
a byproduct of the complex
processes in the brain
and that it's inseparable
from the physical body.
In simpler terms, your mind
is the resulting process
of neurons firing
in your brain--
nothing more and nothing less.
Unfortunately, there is no
actual neurological proof
to support this idea.
And for many who
are deeply studying
the question of the mind,
these materialist scientists
are not looking
in the right place
or using the right methods.
Other scientists are
proposing theories
of non-local consciousness-- the
idea that our brains are merely
the physical conduit
for the mind, not
the source of its origin.
These theories often
explore fringe cases,
such as near-death
experiences, precognition
and psychic phenomena,
in hopes that they
can provide a more complete
picture of the human mind.
Of course, the majority
of this evidence
is not measurable to the
extent that most mainstream
materialist scientists
would accept.
Responding to eyewitness
accounts describing
near-death experience,
Neil deGrasse Tyson said,
one of the lowest forms of
evidence you could possibly
invoke is eyewitness testimony.
Just give me something
that does not
have to flow
through your senses,
because your senses are some of
the worst data taking devices
that exist.
Modern science did
not receive maturity
until we had instruments that
either extended our senses,
or replaced them.
Indeed, from the
simplest microscope
to the Large Hadron
Collider, it is
impossible to imagine
scientific progress
without such instruments.
But if our senses are
considered fallible
as scientific instruments,
what should we make of the mind
we use to process and
interpret this collected data?
Human consciousness must
be considered as unreliable
as our senses--
perhaps even more reliable, as
we know far less about the mind
than we do about
our sense organs.
This paradoxical reality is
a serious issue for science.
How can we study the human
mind if the only tool
we have at our disposal
is the human mind itself?
In his book, Why
Science is Wrong,
science podcaster Alex
Tsakiris sums up the problem--
"if my consciousness is
more than my physical brain,
then consciousness
is the X factor
in every science experiment.
It's the asterisk in
the footnotes that says,
we came as close
as we could, but we
had to leave out
consciousness in order
to make our numbers work."
Part of this consciousness
problem in scientific study
is the observer effect--
the theory that simply observing
a situation or phenomenon
necessarily changes
that phenomenon.
On a quantum level,
physicists found
that even passive observation
of quantum phenomena
can change the measured result,
leading to the popular belief
that a conscious mind can
directly affect reality.
If we do, in fact, co-create
a shared consciousness,
then our beliefs
would necessarily
influence our science.
Dan Siegel, a professor of
psychiatry at UCLA School
of Medicine, has argued for
decades that we cannot simply
look inside the brain when
trying to understand the mind.
"I realized, if someone asked
me to define the coastline,
but insisted, is it
the water or the sand,
I would have to say the
coast is both sand and sea,"
says Siegel.
"I started thinking, maybe the
mind is like the coastline--
your thoughts, feelings,
memories, attention.
What you experience in
the subjective world
is part of mind."
For Siegel and others,
it's impossible to conceive
of a mind that's purely
inside the brain.
But those exploring
the outer frontiers
of consciousness study
are willing to take
this idea much, much further.
Ervin Laszlo, PhD, is
one of many thinkers
who proposes the idea of
a cosmic consciousness,
describing it as a web that
connects the entire universe.
This conscious field manifests
locally in the human brain,
theoretically meaning
that the brain is
able to connect to
the consciousness
of the entire universe.
In support of his theory, he
presents numerous case studies
of near-death experiences,
after death communication,
and recollections of past
lives, as well as cutting edge
research in quantum mechanics.
Laszlo writes, "we are beginning
to see the entire universe
as a holographically
inter-linked network of energy
and information.
We, and all things
in the universe,
are non-locally
connected with each other
and with all other
things in ways
that are unfettered by the
hitherto known limitations
of space and time."
Those known limitations
of space and time
are the border walls
of materialist science,
and in the last century,
quantum mechanics
has begun to tear that wall
down, one brick at a time.
Quantum entanglement proves that
tiny particles can communicate
instantaneously in defiance
of our known rules of space
and time.
Many have hypothesized that if
these tiny particles can remain
connected outside of
standard physical means,
then the entire universe is
inherently connected as Laszlo
and others have suggested.
And while that may
someday be proven true,
we have barely
scratched the surface
when it comes to the quantum
implications of the mind.
Although there is
extensive evidence
for non-local consciousness,
it is rarely embraced
by mainstream
scientists, because it
can't be measured using
currently available technology.
And that makes significant
progress challenging.
Accepting nonlocality
forces the rejection
of a purely
materialist worldview,
and that is a huge disruption
for our current scientific
paradigm.
Yet the study of
consciousness is slowly
forcing materialistic
science to admit it may not
be able to explain everything.
As Nikola Tesla famously
said, "the day science begins
to study nonphysical
phenomena, it
will make more
progress in one decade
than in all the previous
centuries of its existence."
The study of human
consciousness could
be the motivating factor pushing
us towards that new frontier.